I guess.
I love the Handmaid's Tale.
It's not necessarily that I want to talk about that or the new novel or your body of work, but where you did present a theocratic society, and we're having this thing with Rushdie and the Ayatollah.
A comment on this extraordinary turn on something that
Religion and politics is the most potent combination.
But to have a religious leader, the head of the political ring of the society, it is an almost impossible situation for anyone who's a fan.
Because not only are you politically persona non grata,
You're religiously the same.
And in Christianity, which has a history of doing this kind of thing... This is a piece I'm writing for next week, by the way.
It's usually been when the two things were the same, that we brought the witch burnings and the inquisition and all of those other examples.
Our past is not spotless.
But a fiction writer.
A fiction writer.
You mean, where did I get the idea?
No, I mean, still on the OSD.
Oh, you mean, how am I responding to that book?
Okay.
It is interesting that a contract has been put out to kill a novelist, do you think?
Well, worldwide, of course, many novelists and poets have been killed.
Could you cite any instances of that?
Oh, yeah.
All you need to do is get the 10 Writers in Prison Committee's list.
of people who are in prison, missing.
Because of what they've written?
Because of what they've written.
Yeah, absolutely.
All over the place.
This would be a worthwhile thing to pursue, I think.
For you to pursue as a journalist.
Yeah.
Because nobody's picked up on it so far.
Well, we've all been saying it because we have worked with Writers in Prison Committee and we know that the depression of a writer is not a unique event.
in the world that we live in.
And it can take all kinds of forms.
They can be killed surreptitiously.
They can be—I mean, in Mexico, they shoot journalists that shoot bad pieces about the pieces the government doesn't like.
Journalism history, I mean, Socrates was a philosopher, but I mean, a person who writes stories.
Oh, poets.
There are hardly any poets in El Salvador.
They're all either dead or an exile.
There are fiction writers in Killie that have death threats against him at this very moment, even at his feet.
So this is by no means... It's not unique.
What's unique about it is that it's ahead of day doing it openly.
And putting a price on it.
Putting a price on it.
I'm sorry to laugh.
It's not funny.
I mean, I'm laughing.
No, how they usually do it, how many other people do it, is to do it secretly.
And then they don't admit they've done it.
Death, blood, pressure.
They've disappeared.
What's different about this is that it's so open.
Now, there's another way of looking at it, which was that if he had really wanted this guy dead, he would have had him killed first, and then said why he had done it.
But in fact, I think politically, Salman Rushdie is much more valuable to the Ayatollah alive than dead.
Because alive, he can still be used as a rallying cry.
Dead, that's the end of the incident.
He does think of something else.
Well, that's an excellent comment.
I want to make another comment, which is this.
This also has to be said.
Defending freedom of speech means also defending the freedom of speech of Muslims who don't like the book.
In other words, you can't tell them
to like it if they don't.
And you can't put a muzzle on them and say that they cannot express their dislike.
Do you think there's a movement to do that?
Well, I think when anybody ever says, you know, ban the book, everybody else says, sit down and shut up.
As long as they stay within the law.
You can dislike something without banning it.
I mean, I don't think that's the sense.
Or let us say that there is a backlash and mosques are receiving bomb threats too.
Now, the other thing is, there has been a thundering silence from both the American government and from the Canadian government.
They have not said, as they ought to have said, we will protect our citizens.
Both bookstore owners and Muslims whose mosques are being threatened.
Do you have a sense of why this is?
Aha.
Time will tell.
With our lot, I think it's just general chicken-ness.
If I had had a government that had been involved in something so complicated as the Iran contract scandal, I would have other thoughts.
Very interesting.
We have really said nothing about it, haven't we?
Not officially.
And really, our writers haven't said a whole lot about it.
Oh, they sure have.
I mean, we've got a few.
I mean, we had the thing in New York.
Oh, they had a whole big reading.
They've been on television everywhere I have gone.
I've been asked about this, and I've gone blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
The Canadian ones have been all over the TV, but... The British have been... The British have been way out there.
Margaret Thatcher has delivered a blistering attack.
Well, did you see the Times this morning?
Well, New York, I'm sorry.
Charles Vowell wrote a letter really taking Rushdie to task, saying he knew what he was doing.
Well, nobody knows that.
Nobody knows whether he knew what he was doing or not.
That kind of comment sounds very much to me like she shouldn't have worn that short dress.
You know, so blame the victim.
Forgive the rapist that she had it coming.
You know, I have no patience with that.
He wasn't joined in the statement either.
Well, first of all, you don't know what another person used or didn't know.
And I saw...
So then, Rusty, before this death threat thing came out, but when people were marching.
And he looked pretty shocked to me.
He may have been acting, but he looked shocked.
Really?
And disturbed.
He was just in Boston.
I know.
This was in London.
I was over there doing this very same thing.
So he may have known that some people wouldn't like it, but I don't think he was in any way anticipating
And also, there are other ways of reading that book.
One whole section of it reads like an apologia for religion, indeed.
I've not yet read it.
Well, when you do, you will find that it is a very complicated piece of business and nowhere near as clear-cut as the comments might have had you believe, for instance.
I think the stuff about the prophet, I guess about the closest analogy, would be, in a way, that's the movie The Life of Brian.
Did you ever see that?
Well, it was a parallel figure, a sort of non-Christ, who, however, keeps getting confused with Christ.
And it's pretty outrageous.
And the end of it, it ends with this outrageous scene in which there are all these people on the cross, and they're doing a song and dance on the cross.
And, you know, it's pretty outrageous, but nobody would ever say this is going to ruin Christianity.
Okay, this would be for one piece that I'm writing on this business.
A lot of Canadian Muslims have come out and said, we don't like the book that we disassociate ourselves in the death row.
And other people are saying, this is not what his land teaches.
The death threat is not our understanding of the spirit of our religion.
Meanwhile, I talked to the publicist at Viking Press yesterday, and they had 10,000, 10,000, he said, people marching outside their building on Saturday.
In New York.
All anti-Vikings.
I've known publishing people for 12 years.
They don't want you to use their names.
It's like police contacts.
Please just say a Viking spokesperson.
They're getting bomb threats.
I mean, this doesn't happen to publishing houses.
They have 10,000 people.
Well, it has happened to publishing houses in other countries all the time.
It's just that now it's happening here, and we're getting a taste of what it's like.
Extraordinary.
Publishing houses have been closed down.
They've been wiped out.
The people running them have been murdered.
I'm glad I asked you this question because I hadn't even thought about that.
Ask anybody from Argentina during the terror.
Ask people from Chile who are in exile here.
I think the sense of the question is really storytellers.
Writers in general.
I'm going to look at you thinking New York might have some stuff on that.
Oh, yes, they would.
Call Karen Kennerly.
Karen Kennerly.
K-A-R-E-N.
Kennerly.
K-E-N-N-E-R-L-Y.
Karen Kennerly at the Penn New York office.
Just shut this up for a second.
Say that.
We're trying to get a woman out of prison in another country who's there because of something her husband wants.
Well, I think we're just very naive.
Is that quite a few more?
There's a bag there, but there's also a bag there.
There's a lot of water.
No, thank you, Ms.
Black.
Novelists, for me, are the most difficult interviews, because a novel, to me, speaks for itself.
Good for you.
Either it does or it doesn't.
Either it doesn't, or it does or it doesn't.
And so we kind of do have to dance around a little bit.
I hope that's okay.
I have a wonderful review of your book, which I signed and which I have and which I'm running a week from Sunday.
So if you don't mind, we won't necessarily talk about the novel, but we probably will in any case, but I won't certainly ask you to explain things.
That's my job.
You know what I'm saying.
However, if you don't mind, and consider it a naive question, but why do you feel that you need the disclaimer?
Because with every single one of my other books, including The Handmaid's Tale, somebody has tried to make out that it was autobiographical, including The Handmaid's Tale.
Including The Handmaid's Tale.
Well, people are now asking E.L.
Baltero whether Billy Bosgate's character was autobiographical.
Did he hang out with Scott Schultz?
It wasn't, it wasn't.
I mean, I then said to him, did this happen to that, and he said, no, I made it up.
But I mean, we get our ideas from things.
Oh, sure, you get your ideas from things, but that's not the same as saying it's the story of your life.
Right, otherwise you call it a memoir.
Otherwise you call it a memoir, and you try not to lie too much, or else if you lie, you know it's lying.
So this was...
a statement, please don't ask me any more questions about... Well, it had the opposite effect.
Well, it is rather an unusual... Actually, it's almost the same thing that Alice Monroe put at the front of Life of Girls and Women.
I don't recall.
Well, she said, this may sound like another form of... this is autobiographical, but as soon as you write in the first person, people say, uh-huh.
Why are the paintings...
Not real.
Why are they not real?
Yeah.
What do you mean?
They don't exist?
Yeah.
I mean, they're real.
I'm sorry, they don't exist, yes.
Why not use real paintings?
Because they wouldn't have in them what I would want them to have in.
That's a good answer.
Yeah.
That's a wonderful answer.
What other real paintings would I use?
They would be by an existing artist.
Right.
Of course.
That is a nice question.
I apologize for that.
If you're going to make up an artist, you have to make up their art, too.
Right.
I'm sorry.
I do like the epigraph, though.
Why do we always look at the past?
Why do we remember the past and not the future?
And not the future.
Well, of course, as soon as you say that, you think, maybe we do remember the future.
Well, and of course the question meets nicely into the previous novel.
And I wonder if you saw these two as a pair, in a way.
The future in the past?
Yeah, I mean, it's a pretty basic question, but you certainly are reflecting in this one.
Well, the Handmaid's Tale is also about the past, of course, because there's nothing in it that human societies have not done.
So, in fact, a great deal more historical research went into it than went into Catholics.
Was there any reason why you set that in Cambridge?
Absolutely every reason you can possibly imagine.
Number one, home of the Puritans.
Number two, seed of one of the great institutions, one of the great living institutions of learning.
And if it's Harvard, in which widely libraries have been taken as a secret service, you can imagine what the rest of the country is like.
Number three, I lived there for four years.
Number four, my ancestors were 17th century American parents, and then came to Massachusetts, India.
So that when I came to Harvard, which I did in 1961, I was retaking ancestral steps.
a certain rag yard which exists there and the wall.
Cambridge is one of my favorite places.
Well you probably don't know what all the buildings were for instance the Stoll Stolls is the Harvard Coupes and the place where they get their costumes is the Brattle Theatre and you can walk the whole thing out.
It's not being filmed there where it's locked, it's being filmed in
in North Carolina, which will do very well.
But, of course, Harvard is quite careful about this book.
They didn't think it was amusing to have all those bodies hanging on the wall.
No, no, and I can appreciate that.
And I didn't mean to be asking.
Well, the other reason was, of course, Terry Miller was one of my professors.
And he's the man who almost single-handedly resurrected the study of American food.
So I thought it quite fitting.
It wasn't necessarily a comment on the United States then, per se.
It was just inappropriate.
Oh, it was.
Oh, yes, it was.
Oh, yes, indeed it was.
Some might sniff, why not Canada?
Oh, well, many a good reason.
Canada is a third French and a half Catholic.
It would be very hard to get unanimity.
It's very hard to get unanimity on anything in Canada.
And you certainly would not be able to get that groundswell
Any totalitarian regime needs a 20 to 30 percent support rate to succeed.
You cannot impose a regime upon a population in which nobody agrees with it.
You can't do it.
You need a certain percentage of people to do it.
Okay.
That's an excellent answer.
Yeah.
One other, which comes to mind now, at the very end of Handmaid's Tale, I hope you don't mind my talking about the body of work.
Not at all.
wondering why you jumped way ahead.
Okay, I've got excellent reasons for that as well.
One of them comes from the tradition of the utopia dystopia, and from my feeling, which I've rarely seen talks about, in fact, when I thought of it, I'd never seen it talk about, but 1984 is a much more optimistic book than people have ever given Orwell credit for.
I've never heard this before.
Well, because
It does not end with Winston Smith coming to love their brother, as we all remember it ending.
It ends with a note on Muir's feet written in the past tense in standard English.
Muir's feet was a language which... Now, if you are going to take the whole form of the book seriously, which I do, we have to assume Orwell is therefore saying that society existed in the future, after 1984,
in which a person existed, he could write in this rather dispassionate, scholarly way about Newspeak in the past tense.
Assumption, it no longer exists.
Assumption, I am a free agent who can write about this with great freedom without having the secret police come and do me in.
So from that I concluded that he foresaw beyond 1984 into a future in which it was over.
So a lot of my books are similarly optimistic.
So the pessimistic part of it is that the scholar from Cambridge, England, sounds exactly the same.
But the assumption about that is that those guys never change.
Did you sense that you were writing a thriller type of a book?
Oh, it has to have tension.
Otherwise, you don't turn the page.
The pitfall with utopia is that you can get easily
seduced into giving a tour of the future, which would be just as boring as tours of the stocking factory usually are.
This is how we do things in our society, here's the sewage plant, you know, this place.
So I didn't know what to do about it.
I have a long reading background in this form, and I had ideas about what works and
It was an extraordinarily popular book.
I thought it was.
My other reason for the note at the end, by the way, is that the character in the book lives in such a circumscribed way that there are questions which will occur to the reader that she is unable to know the answers to, because she does not have the freedom of movement and access to information that would allow her to know those answers.
You don't do sequels, thank goodness, but do you ever wonder what happened to her and Tom?
She's done a handmaid tale.
Well, you know, she does go off.
She goes off.
God bless her.
Yes.
The only thing I could think of, the only other thing I could think of doing with that would be to write the story from the point of view of seeing the joy.
But does that appeal to you, or is this completed work?
Not at the moment.
We never know what's going to appeal to you.
I don't think John Updike thought when he wrote Rabbit Run that he would later write two sequels.
Yeah, but that brings me back to the autobiographical thing.
I think Rabbit really is a part of John Updike.
I don't think you deny that either.
Do you think Janice drowned their baby in the bathtub?
No.
And I don't think anybody ever owned a Toyota agency or whatever, but that would be wonderful, and that was rich.
Anyway, it does kind of leap nicely into that Hawking epigraph, past and future, and maybe some like myself can see these two as a peer, because we really are looking backward here, not to still go in these titles or anything.
I wonder what prompted you to go from the very next work to an examination.
Well, this is a work that has been kicking around for some time.
In fact, I have notes on it that go as far back as 1964.
So it wasn't a sort of new thought.
Indeed, I had started it again before I started it.
Really got possessed by Handmaid's Tale, which took over everything.
Were you possessed?
I don't mean to jump around the block here.
You got possessed by any book you write if it's going well.
The moments that you don't feel possessed.
This work was in progress then prior to Handmaid's Tale?
No, I wouldn't even call it in progress.
It was drifting around.
Once you have several pages.
That's drifting around, but it's not really in progress.
But it tends to its beginning.
So, and I interrupted you by telling you you became possessed by Handmaid's Tale, that you finished, and then took this up?
Then I came back to this.
So it wasn't a new, it wasn't a totally new idea that I had.
Did the idea change at all?
The idea changed a lot.
But my ideas always change.
How about the characters?
The characters change.
The things that remain constant are things like the Eaton's catalog.
Going to see the trains on Sunday.
But the decades, they remain the same.
Well, history, setting, and time.
obviously are going to remain what they are.
I'm not going to change the 40s into the 20s or anything.
Well, you might have started in the 50s.
I could have started it in the 50s, but then it would have been a different story.
Then you'd have had a younger character.
I would have had a younger character, and I would have missed a lot of those details that I wanted so much, and I've come to knowing that.
Do you find that your characters are advancing in years at the same time?
Well, when I was eighteen I used to write what I thought were these wonderfully insightful stories about very elderly people.
Were they accurate now in retrospect?
Probably not.
They were always in desperate straits.
They always lived in grooming houses or something.
You've been writing for forever, I guess, sixteen.
Fiction always?
Fiction, poetry, and book reviews.
You are, in fact, a woman of letters, writing in many forms.
I know.
Travel articles.
And your poetry has the greatest respect.
And this is the seventh novel, I guess.
But now, when we discuss Margaret Atwood, we almost say novelist first and poet as opposed to poet.
How do you respond to that?
Well, I say writer.
It covers everything.
You don't have to specialize within your own label.
But in terms of perception, of readership, the big readership out there.
More people read novels than read poetry.
A sad state of affairs.
The people who read poetry tend to read it very precisely.
that has to do with the audience rather than with the writer.
A lot of Canadian writers of my generation wrote those.
Nobody told them not to.
You could get poetry published a lot easier than you could get novels published.
John Upbeck has said, if you are to be remembered as a writer,
What would you like to be remembered for most?
And I believe he has said his poetry.
It's unlikely to happen, but I think his short fiction and his novels, certainly, and his criticism.
Not to say anything bad about his poetry, but I just don't think that that's what people 30 years or 40 or 50 years want.
Let's turn that question on Margaret Atwood.
What would you like most to be?
This question just developed right now, I'm sorry.
Well, I would just turn the question another way and say that my chief wish would be that there will be people around in 50 years to do remembering.
You are this pessimistic about a world population of 10 billion?
How can it not end in disasters?
You do think we're a terminal species then?
No, no, no.
We still have the building to make choices, but we better start making the heavy things.
Let's put the question another way.
What are you proudest of when you have completed work?
I'm not old enough to be asked those questions.
But you're accomplished enough.
You're accomplished enough, however.
I think it's bad luck to ask your questions like that.
And I think that's a good answer.
It's huge enough.
You certainly are a writer who is a Canadian.
Is Canadian literature still evolving, or can we really characterize or describe Canadian literature?
Well, we constantly do characterize it and describe it.
It's like characterizing and describing American literature in the same way.
That is, as soon as you've characterized it and described it, somebody comes along and does something different.
But that's literature, which is wonderful.
But you look at the New York Times bestseller list, and prominent on the fiction side are two Canadian authors, yourself and Robinson Davis.
Well, that's okay, because prominent on our bestseller list are many Americans.
So it sort of balances things out a little.
But we've got ten times as many people as we have.
Well, that's true.
Probably ten times as many offers.
That's about true as well.
So, I mean, to have in the top ten, twenty percent, you know, two out of ten, that's a pretty decent average, isn't it?
Yes, it is fun, and I like Robert from Davis very much.
He was here a couple weeks ago, so I had the opportunity to talk.
And I love the fact that you're just
The only thing you really have in common is that you're Canadian writers.
Oh, we've got more in common than that.
Oh, come on.
I don't want to lose any of this.
You do?
Yes.
Tell me.
I asked him the same question, by the way.
And he said, I'm a boy and she's a girl.
No, let us just say that all Canadians have a body of knowledge in common, just as all Americans have a body of knowledge in common.
But beyond that, we're both from Ontario, where we make that a large part of the material.
I taught a course in Alabama a little while ago, and then I was the same course in New York City.
It was.
It was very interesting.
And it was called Southern Ontario Gothic.
And it was writers from Ontario.
It was Robertson Davies and Alice Munro and Timothy Simblee and Graham Gibson.
and Marian Angle and a number of fathers.
You put it together, it's really a lot of names.
Yeah, Michael Ondaatje.
I wasn't able to use In the Skin of the Lines if you hadn't written it yet, but I would certainly use it.
I would do it again.
And examining the gothic and magical elements in their work.
a wonderful writer called James Manning.
He was probably not here at all.
We'll say it's high right.
R-A-I-N-E-Y.
R-E-A-N-E-Y.
The Alabamians are so high on him that they found him long distance.
But the similarities, I think, are really kind of circumstantial, actually.
No.
I mean, you can talk about Southern writing.
I'm just going to turn this.
Just excuse me.